.TH RUSH 1 "July 2026" "rush" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rush \- POSIX-facing shell with modern interactive features
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rush
.RB [ --login ]
.RB [ --posix ]
.RB [ -i ]
.RB [ -u ]
.RB [ -x ]
.PP
.B rush
.RB [ --posix ]
.RB [ -i ]
.RB [ -u ]
.RB [ -x ]
.BI -c " script"
.RI [ name
.RI [ args ...]]
.PP
.B rush
.RB [ --posix ]
.RB [ -i ]
.RB [ -u ]
.RB [ -x ]
.RB [ -- ]
.I script-file
.RI [ args ...]
.PP
.B rush --help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rush
is an experimental command interpreter for POSIX-like systems.
It provides a POSIX-facing shell language, selected Bash-compatible features,
and an interactive editor with history search, autosuggestions, structured
completion, and asynchronous prompts.
.PP
With no script operand,
.B rush
starts an interactive shell when standard input is a terminal.  Otherwise it
reads commands from standard input.  The
.B -i
option forces interactive operation when standard input is not a terminal.
.PP
The
.B -c
form evaluates
.IR script .
If
.I name
is present, it becomes
.BR $0 ;
remaining operands become positional parameters.  Without
.IR name ,
.B rush
is used as
.BR $0 .
.PP
When a script file is supplied, its path becomes
.B $0
and subsequent operands become positional parameters.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --help
Write a short usage summary and exit.
.TP
.B --login
Start an interactive login shell.  A leading hyphen in the invocation name
also selects login-shell behavior.
.TP
.B --posix
Select POSIX mode.  Rush targets POSIX.1-2024 (Issue 8) in this mode and
diagnoses unsupported compatibility syntax more strictly.
.TP
.B -i
Force interactive operation.
.TP
.B -u
Treat expansion of an unset parameter as an error.
.TP
.B -x
Write command traces to standard error before executing commands.
.TP
.BI -c " script"
Read commands from
.I script
instead of a file or standard input.
.TP
.B --
End option processing.  This is required when a script file name begins with
a hyphen.
.SH INTERACTIVE FEATURES
Interactive Rush provides Emacs and vi editing modes, persistent searchable
history, context-aware autosuggestions, JSON completion manifests, dynamic
completion providers, styled diagnostics, abbreviations, job control, and
asynchronous prompt segments.
.PP
The embedded default configuration defines a responsive prompt, terminal-aware
styles, and common abbreviations.  Later startup files can override or remove
those defaults.
.SH STARTUP FILES
Interactive startup files are read in the following order.  Missing files are
ignored.
.IP 1. 3
Embedded default configuration.
.IP 2. 3
The file named by
.BR ENV ,
if set.
.IP 3. 3
.I /etc/rush/profile.rush
for login shells.
.IP 4. 3
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/rush/profile.rush
for login shells.
.IP 5. 3
.IR /etc/rush/config.rush .
.IP 6. 3
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/rush/config.rush .
.PP
If
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset, user configuration is read below
.IR $HOME/.config/rush .
The system directory can be changed when Rush is built.
See
.BR rush (5)
for prompt functions, async segments, editor styles, and event configuration.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ENV
Names an additional interactive startup file.  Parameter expansions in the
value are evaluated before the file is read.
.TP
.B HOME
Provides fallbacks for user configuration, data, and state paths.
.TP
.B PATH
Controls command lookup.
.TP
.BR PS1 , " PS2"
Set the primary and continuation prompts.
.TP
.BR XDG_CONFIG_HOME ,
.BR XDG_DATA_HOME ,
.B XDG_DATA_DIRS
and
.B XDG_STATE_HOME
Control user configuration, autoloaded function, completion, and history
locations.
.SH FILES
The system paths below are for a typical installation under
.IR /usr ;
the installation prefix and system configuration directory can be changed at
build time.
.TP
.I /etc/rush/profile.rush
System login profile.
.TP
.I /etc/rush/config.rush
System interactive configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.config/rush/profile.rush
User login profile when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset.
.TP
.I ~/.config/rush/config.rush
User interactive configuration when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/rush/history.sqlite
Persistent history database when
.B XDG_STATE_HOME
is unset.
.TP
.I /usr/share/rush/completions
Installed completion manifests and providers.
.TP
.I /usr/share/rush/functions
Installed autoloadable functions.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status is the status of the last command executed.  Invocation and
shell errors use status 2.  If a command cannot be found, Rush uses status 127;
if it is found but cannot be executed, Rush uses status 126.
.SH STANDARDS
.B rush --posix
targets the Shell and Utilities volume of POSIX.1-2024 (Issue 8).  Rush is under
active development and does not claim complete conformance.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/rockorager/rush/issues
.UE .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rush (5),
.BR sh (1),
.BR bash (1),
.BR chsh (1)
