.TH RUSH 5 "July 2026" "rush" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
rush \- interactive configuration and prompt customization
.SH DESCRIPTION
Rush configuration files are Rush shell scripts.
They can define shell variables, functions, abbreviations, editor styles,
event handlers, and prompts.
.PP
The embedded defaults provide a prompt, editor theme, and common
abbreviations.  Files read later during startup can replace or remove any of
these defaults.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILES
Interactive startup files are read in the following order.  Missing files are
ignored.
.IP 1. 3
Embedded default configuration.
.IP 2. 3
The file named by
.BR ENV ,
if set.
.IP 3. 3
.I /etc/rush/profile.rush
for login shells.
.IP 4. 3
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/rush/profile.rush
for login shells.
.IP 5. 3
.IR /etc/rush/config.rush .
.IP 6. 3
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/rush/config.rush .
.PP
If
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset, user files are read below
.IR $HOME/.config/rush .
The system configuration directory can be changed when Rush is built.
.PP
The value of
.B ENV
undergoes shell parameter expansion before it is used.  Field splitting and
pathname expansion are not applied.  Relative paths are resolved from the
current directory.  Point
.B ENV
only at trusted files.
.SH PROMPT FUNCTIONS
Define
.B rush_prompt
to render the editable prompt.  Prompt functions build their output with the
.B prompt
builtin rather than writing ordinary output.
.PP
On entry to a prompt function,
.B $?
is the status of the previous command.  Save it before running another command
if the prompt needs to display it.
.EX
  rush_prompt() {
    rush_prompt_status=$?
    prompt segment --fg bright-blue "$(prompt_pwd)"
    if test "$rush_prompt_status" != 0; then
      prompt segment --fg red " status $rush_prompt_status"
    fi
    prompt text ' > '
  }
.EE
.SS Transient prompt
If
.B rush_prompt_transient
is defined, Rush uses it to redraw an accepted command line after Enter is
pressed.  The next editable line still uses
.BR rush_prompt .
This can keep scrollback compact while retaining a detailed editing prompt.
.EX
  rush_prompt_transient() {
    if test "$?" = 0; then
      prompt text '> '
    else
      prompt segment --fg red '> '
    fi
  }
.EE
Unset the function to leave accepted prompts unchanged.
.EX
  unset -f rush_prompt_transient
.EE
.SS Right prompt
If
.B rush_prompt_right
is defined, Rush renders its result flush-right on the editable input line.
The right prompt is hidden when it would collide with the input and is not
retained on an accepted command line.
.EX
  rush_prompt_right() {
    duration="$(prompt_duration)" || return 0
    prompt segment --dim "$duration"
  }
.EE
.SS PS1 fallback
If
.B rush_prompt
is not defined or cannot produce a prompt, Rush uses
.BR PS1 .
If
.B PS1
is also unset, the fallback is
.BR "rush> " .
.B PS2
is used for continuation input.
.EX
  unset -f rush_prompt
  PS1='rush> '
  PS2='> '
.EE
.SH PROMPT BUILTIN
The prompt-building forms are:
.EX
  prompt text TEXT...
  prompt segment [STYLE...] TEXT...
  prompt async KEY --ttl MS [STYLE...] [--prefix TEXT] -- COMMAND...
  prompt newline
  prompt async-pending
.EE
.TP
.BI "prompt text " "TEXT..."
Append plain text.  Multiple operands are separated by spaces.
.TP
.BI "prompt segment " "[STYLE...] TEXT..."
Append styled text.  Multiple text operands are separated by spaces.
.TP
.B prompt newline
Append a newline to make a multi-line prompt.
.TP
.B prompt async-pending
Return status 0 while asynchronous prompt work is active and status 1
otherwise.  This is useful for activity indicators.
.PP
The text, segment, newline, and async forms contribute output only while Rush
is rendering a prompt function.
.SH SEGMENT STYLES
.B prompt segment
and
.B prompt async
accept these style options:
.TP
.BI "--fg " COLOR
Set the foreground color.
.TP
.BI "--bg " COLOR
Set the background color.
.TP
.B --bold
Use bold text.
.TP
.B --dim
Use dim text.
.TP
.B --italic
Use italic text.
.TP
.B --underline
Use single underlining.
.TP
.B --reverse
Reverse foreground and background.
.TP
.B --strikethrough
Use struck-through text.
.PP
Colors can be
.BR default ;
the names
.BR black ,
.BR red ,
.BR green ,
.BR yellow ,
.BR blue ,
.BR magenta ,
.BR cyan ,
and
.BR white ;
their
.B bright-
variants; a 256-color palette index written as
.B index:N
or
.BR N ;
or a truecolor value written as
.BR #rrggbb .
.SH ASYNCHRONOUS SEGMENTS
Use
.B prompt async
for information that may be slow to compute, such as repository state.
.EX
  rush_prompt() {
    prompt segment --fg bright-blue "$(prompt_pwd)"
    prompt async git-branch --ttl 5000 --prefix ' ' --fg green -- \e
      git branch --show-current
    prompt text ' > '
  }
.EE
.PP
The
.I KEY
and current directory identify a cached value.  The
.B --ttl
value is its lifetime in milliseconds.  Rush immediately renders cached
standard output, with trailing newlines removed.  If the value is missing or
stale, Rush runs
.I COMMAND
in a background child with standard error hidden.  The old value, or no value,
remains visible until the command finishes; Rush then redraws the prompt.
.PP
.BI "--prefix " TEXT
is emitted only when the cached command output is nonempty.  Async segments
accept the same style options as
.BR "prompt segment" .
.PP
Keep ordinary prompt functions fast.  Prefer async segments or event handlers
to slow command substitutions in
.BR rush_prompt .
.SH PROMPT HELPERS
.TP
.B prompt_pwd
Write the current directory, replacing the leading home directory with
.BR ~ .
.TP
.BI "prompt_pwd -d " N
.TQ
.BI "prompt_pwd --dir-length " N
Shorten all but the final path components to at most
.I N
characters.
.TP
.BI "prompt_pwd -D " N
.TQ
.BI "prompt_pwd --full-length-dirs " N
Keep the last
.I N
components at full length when shortening a path.  The default is 1.
.TP
.B prompt_duration
Write the duration of the previous command in milliseconds.  Return status 1
when no duration is available.
.PP
For example, in
.IR ~/repos/rush :
.EX
  prompt_pwd             # ~/repos/rush
  prompt_pwd -d 1        # ~/r/rush
  prompt_pwd -d 1 -D 2   # ~/repos/rush
.EE
.SH EDITOR STYLES
The interactive editor reads semantic style variables before each prompt.
Values are comma-separated fields such as:
.EX
  rush_style_directory='fg=blue'
  rush_style_selection='fg=cyan,bold'
  rush_style_error='ul=curly,ul_color=red'
.EE
.PP
Supported fields are
.BR fg=COLOR ,
.BR bg=COLOR ,
.BR ul=STYLE ,
.BR ul_color=COLOR ,
.BR bold ,
.BR dim ,
.BR italic ,
.BR reverse ,
and
.BR strike .
Underline styles are
.BR none ,
.BR single ,
.BR double ,
.BR curly ,
.BR dotted ,
and
.BR dashed .
Invalid style values are ignored.
.PP
The available variables are
.BR rush_style_selection ,
.BR rush_style_command ,
.BR rush_style_plain ,
.BR rush_style_directory ,
.BR rush_style_option ,
.BR rush_style_variable ,
.BR rush_style_function ,
.BR rush_style_file ,
.BR rush_style_muted ,
.BR rush_style_flash ,
.BR rush_style_match ,
.BR rush_style_error ,
.BR rush_style_comment ,
.BR rush_style_quote ,
.BR rush_style_pending ,
.BR rush_style_reserved ,
and
.BR rush_style_operator .
.PP
Define
.B rush_style
to recompute these variables at startup and when terminal color information
changes.  Before calling it, Rush sets
.B rush_color_scheme
to
.BR dark ,
.BR light ,
or
.BR unknown .
When reported by the terminal,
.BR rush_color_foreground ,
.BR rush_color_background ,
and the ANSI palette variables from
.B rush_color_black
through
.B rush_color_white
contain
.B #rrggbb
values.
.PP
The color helpers can derive truecolor values:
.EX
  color dim '#204080' 25
  color blend '#000000' '#ffffff' 50
.EE
.SH PROMPT EVENTS
Prompt-related event handlers are registered with
.BR event :
.EX
  event add EVENT NAME FUNCTION [--priority N]
  event add timer.tick NAME FUNCTION --every MS [--priority N]
  event remove EVENT NAME
  event list [EVENT]
.EE
.TP
.B prompt.prepare
Runs before each editable prompt render.  Use it to update inexpensive prompt
variables.
.TP
.B prompt.async.start
Runs when async prompt activity begins.  The handler receives the activity
kind in
.B $1
and the active count in
.BR $2 .
.TP
.B prompt.async.end
Runs when all async prompt activity has ended, with the activity kind in
.B $1
and zero in
.BR $2 .
.TP
.B timer.tick
Runs at a registered interval while the editor is idle.  Use it for clocks or
animations rather than sleeping in a prompt function.  The handler receives
its registration name in
.BR $1 .
.PP
Event handlers preserve the visible value of
.BR $? .
Reusing an event/name pair replaces the existing handler.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/rush/profile.rush
System login profile.
.TP
.I /etc/rush/config.rush
System interactive configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.config/rush/profile.rush
User login profile when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset.
.TP
.I ~/.config/rush/config.rush
User interactive configuration when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset.
.TP
.I /usr/share/rush/config.rush
Installed copy of the embedded default configuration for reference.  The
installed data directory can be changed at build time.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rush (1),
.BR sh (1)
